# Scenarios

User testing scenarios for the MyPAIN and PainManager applications.

https://cds.ahrq.gov/collaboration/pages/viewpage.action?pageId=83132464

### RTI, Chicago, and Vanderbilt implementation
#### Chronic Lower Back Pain;No Recent Opioid Use
Mr Delta, a chronic lower back pain patient with no history of recent opioid use schedules a pain-related appointment with their primary care provider: Mr. Delta, a 43-year-old patient with a recent history of chronic lower back pain schedules a visit with Dr. Charlie and cites his back pain as his primary reason for the visit. The system identifies Mr. Delta, who has no history of recent opioid use [1, see p. 24 for definition used for PMD], as a candidate to receive an invitation to MyPAIN. Before his visit, Mr. Delta receives an invitation to MyPAIN via the local EHR patient portal, MyChart. Mr. Delta accesses MyPAIN and spends about 15 minutes or less reviewing educational material and completing assessments, including indicating how ready he is for his upcoming SDM encounter with Dr. Charlie. When Mr. Delta finishes and exits MyPain or the linked materials, the system automatically sends Dr. Charlie a secure message that Mr. Delta’s materials from MyPAIN are ready for review. Just prior to his visit with Mr. Delta, Dr. Charlie spends a few minutes reviewing the information assembled for his SDM encounter in PainManager which includes all of the information Mr. Delta submitted via MyPAIN. Dr. Charlie notes that Mr. Delta’s pain functional status has been unacceptably low, and his pain level has remained elevated over the past 6 months. When Mr. Delta arrives for his visit, Dr. Charlie discusses possible therapeutic approaches with Mr. Delta using the SHARE framework for SDM. Noting that no non-pharmacologic treatments have been ordered for Mr. Delta in the past 6 months, Dr. Charlie recommends physical therapy to Mr. Delta to help improve his functional status as well as acupuncture to reduce his level of pain. Mr. Delta agrees to both options for treatment and this information is documented by Dr. Charlie.

#### Chronic Osteoarthritic Knee and Hip Pain;Recent Opioid Use
MsEcho, a patient with chronic osteoarthritic knee and hip pain has a history of recent opioid use schedules a pain-related appointment with their primary care provider: Ms. Echo, a 65 year old patient with a 5 year history of chronic osteoarthritic knee and hip pain schedules a visit with Dr. Alpha and references how her knee and hip pain continue to make dressing difficult and sometimes makes it hard to fall asleep at night. The system identifies Ms. Echo, who has a history of recent opioid use [1, see p. 24 for definition used for PMD], as a candidate to receive an invitation to MyPAIN. Before her visit, Ms. Echo receives an invitation to MyPAIN via the local EHR patient portal, MyChart.  Ms. Echo accesses MyPAIN and spends about 15 minutes reviewing educational material including an information sheet on alternative therapies to opioids and completing assessments, including indicating how ready she is for her upcoming SDM encounter with Dr. Alpha. When Ms. Echo finishes, the system automatically sends Dr. Alpha a secure message that Ms. Echo’s materials from MyPAIN are ready for review. Just prior to her visit with Ms. Echo, Dr. Alpha spends a few minutes reviewing the information assembled for her SDM encounter in PainManager which includes all of the information Ms. Echo submitted via MyPAIN and reviews the SHARE-based shared decision making information [15] provided in PainManager to prepare for that aspect of the upcoming visit as well. Dr. Alpha notes that Ms. Echo’s pain functional status has been unacceptably low, and her pain level has remained elevated over the past 6 months. Dr. Alpha checks on the status of any recent physical therapy order for Ms. Echo. Using PDMP information, Dr. Alpha also notes that Ms. Echo’s use of opioids for therapy have remained steady over the last 6 months. When Ms. Echo arrives for her visit, Dr. Alpha discusses possible therapeutic approaches with Ms. Echo using the SHARE framework for SDM. Noting that only pharmacologic treatments have been ordered for Ms. Echo in the past 6 months, Dr. Alpha recommends increasing physical therapy for Ms. Echo to help improve her functional status and asks Ms. Echo if she would like to consider a custom brace to also help reduce her level of knee pain [16]. Ms. Echo details her concerns about any increase in opioid therapy and supports recommendations that provide alternatives to opioids to help with her pain. They also discuss whether or not Ms. Echo has previously discussed surgical options with a specialist. Ms. Echo agrees to both options for treatment and this information is documented by Dr. Alpha.

#### 8-year History of Chronic Hip Pain
Ms. Bravo, a 58 year old patient with an 8-year history of chronic hip pain has an upcoming visit with Dr. Stevens. After Ms. Bravo completes MyPAIN, Dr. Stevens receives a secure message that Ms. Bravo has entered materials in MyPAIN that are ready for review. Before Ms. Bravo’s office visit, Dr. Stevens spends a few minutes reviewing the record of Ms. Bravo, and specifically reviews the Pain Management Summary for Ms. Bravo. He compares Ms. Bravo’s medication history, self-reported pain levels, and functional status, noting that while her condition initially improved on a low dose of a non-opioid medication, her improvement has since plateaued. Dr. Stevens decides to recommend increasing the dose of the non-opioid pain medication to attempt to achieve further improvements in functional status.

#### 2-year History of Lower Back Pain
Mr. Ford, a 42 year old patient with a 2-year history of lower back pain receives an invitation to MyPAIN via the local EHR patient portal, MyChart in advance of his upcoming visit with Dr. Clark. After Mr. Ford reviews educational materials and completes related assessments within MyPAIN, Dr. Clark receives a secure message indicating that Mr. Ford’s materials from MyPAIN are ready for review. As Dr. Clark reviews the record of Mr. Ford, including the Pain Management, he reviews Mr. Ford’s self-reported pain levels and functional status, noting that his pain functional status has been unacceptably low, and his pain level remained elevated over the past 6 months. Noting that no non-pharmacologic treatments have been ordered for Mr. Ford in the past 6 months, Dr. Clark decides to recommend physical therapy to Mr. Ford to help improve his functional status as well as acupuncture to reduce his level of pain and Mr. Ford agrees.

#### Fibromyalgia
Ms. Ellis, a 63 year old patient with fibromyalgia receives an invitation to MyPAIN via the local EHR patient portal, MyChart, in advance of her upcoming visit with Dr. Abbott. After Ms. Ellis reviews educational materials and completes related assessments within MyPAIN, Dr. Abbott receives a secure message indicating that Ms. Ellis’s materials from MyPAIN are ready for review. Dr. Abbott reviews the Pain Management Summary data submitted by Ms. Ellis. As she reviews Ms. Ellis’s entry for medications taken, Dr. Abbott also reviews the Prescription Drug Monitoring Program (PDMP) database data for Ms. Ellis within PainManager to determine whether Ms. Ellis has been presecribed other medications of concern from another medical professional. Dr. Abbott finds a recent codeine prescription issued by a provider outside of their health system. Dr. Abbott discusses these results with Ms. Ellis to assess whether her use of an additional opioid is related to misuse, pseudo addiction, diversion, or other underlying conditions, to help determine whether opioid therapy should be continued or tapered.

#### Out-of-age-range
Donnie Marks, a 14 year old male should not be given an invitation, since they are outside the age range

### University of Florida Implementation

#### Recent Opioid and Benzodiazepine Prescription
Alpha Delta, a patient with 2 opioid prescriptions and a prescription for benzodiazepines within the past 12 months schedules an appointment with their primary care provider to discuss chronic pain. Mr. Delta, a 43-year-old patient with a prescription for opioids and benzodiazepines schedules a visit with Dr. Charlie and cites his chronic back pain and current treatment options (medication) as his primary reason for the visit. The system identifies Mr. Delta, who has a history of recent opioid use, as a candidate to receive an invitation to MyPAIN. Before his visit, Mr. Delta receives an invitation to MyPAIN via the local EHR patient portal, MyChart. Mr. Delta accesses MyPAIN and spends about 15 minutes or less completing the questionnaire. He indicates his goal is to cut back on medication treatment and explore other options. When Mr. Delta finishes and exits MyPain, the system sends Dr. Charlie a secure message that Mr. Delta’s MyPain responses are ready to review. Just prior to his visit with Mr. Delta, Dr. Charlie spends a few minutes reviewing the information assembled for his SDM encounter in PainManager which includes all of the information Mr. Delta submitted via MyPAIN. Dr. Charlie notes that Mr. Delta has tried multiple treatments, including prescription medications, topical treatments (e.g., biofreeze, Lidoderm), and lifestyle changes (e.g., stress reduction, exercises). During the visit, Dr. Charlie discusses possible therapeutic approaches such as massage, physical therapy and dry needling with Mr. Delta using the SHARE framework for SDM. At the end of the visit both Dr. Charlie and Mr. Delta decide physical therapy and acupuncture are the best treatment options to improve his functional status as well as reducing his level of pain. Dr. Charlie also indicates that Mr. Delta is receiving opioids and benzodiazepine and based on the CDC Opioid prescribing guidelines he recommends a prescription for naloxone as well. Mr. Delta agrees to both options for treatment as well as the naloxone and this information is documented by Dr. Charlie.

#### Recent Opioid Prescription (Past 5 months)
Sally Echo, a patient that has a with 3 opioid prescriptions and schedules a pain-related appointment with their primary care provider: Ms. Echo, a 65-year-old patient schedules a visit with Dr. Alpha and references how her knee and hip pain continue to make dressing difficult and sometimes makes it hard to fall asleep at night. The system identifies Ms. Echo, who has a 3 opioid prescriptions in the past 5 months, as a candidate to receive an invitation to MyPAIN. Before her visit, Ms. Echo receives an invitation to MyPAIN via the local EHR patient portal, MyChart. Ms. Echo accesses MyPAIN and spends about 15 minutes completing assessments. Ms. Echo When Ms. Echo finishes, the system automatically sends Dr. Alpha a secure message that Ms. Echo’s MyPAIN questionnaire responses are ready for review. Just prior to her visit with Ms. Echo, Dr. Alpha spends a few minutes reviewing the information assembled for her SDM encounter in PainManager which includes all of the information Ms. Echo submitted via MyPAIN provided in PainManager to prepare for that aspect of the upcoming visit as well. Dr. Alpha notes that Ms. Echo’s pain has been interfering with day to day activities quite a bit. Ms. Echo has also tried a few specialists including a physical therapist and orthopedist with little improvement to her pain.  Dr. Alpha checks on the status of any recent physical therapy order for Ms. Echo. In Pain Manager, Dr. Alpha receives a warning that that Ms. Echo’s MME is over 50 and plans to discuss during visit potential non-opioid alternatives for treatment. When Ms. Echo arrives for her visit, Dr. Alpha discusses possible therapeutic approaches with Ms. Echo using the SHARE framework for SDM. Dr. Alpha recommends increasing physical therapy for Ms. Echo to help improve her functional status and asks Ms. Echo if she would like to consider a custom brace to also help reduce her level of knee pain. Ms. Echo details her concerns about any increase in opioid therapy and supports recommendations that provide alternatives to opioids to help with her pain. They also discuss whether or not Ms. Echo has previously discussed surgical options with a specialist. Ms. Echo agrees to both options for treatment and this information is documented by Dr. Alpha.

#### Opioid and muscle prescription in past 6 months
Tommy Jones, a patient that has an upcoming appointment with his primary care clinician, Dr. Smith, and he would like to discuss his uncontrollable chronic pain stemming from shoulder and lower back pain. Mr. Jones receives a notification through his MyChart to complete the MyPAIN questionnaire before his upcoming appointment in 72 hours based on his 2 opioid prescriptions in the past 6 months and his electronic health record does not indicate end-of-life care or history of cancer in the past 3 years. Mr. Jones is a 62-year-old patient who is currently prescribed cyclobenzaprine hydrochloride 10 MG Oral Tablet (muscle relaxer) and Oxycodone Hydrochloride 50 MG Oral Capsule (opioid) to assist with the pain, but it is not helping with the pain. Mr. Jones accesses MyPAIN and begins the questionnaire. He indicates the pain in his shoulder is stabbing and the pain in his back is crushing. Overall, the pain the intensity of the pain is severe and the pain is interfering with is life quite a bit. He also indicates the types of medications he’s tried including over-the-counter pain relievers, which slightly worked and he indicated the muscle relaxers and opioids were helping moderately. He has not seen any specialists for his pain nor had any procedures or physical treatments for his pain. Mr. Jones indicates he has tried heat and/or ice and other topical medications and both treatments slightly worked for the pain. He has not tried any lifestyle changes or alternative treatments. His goal is to be able to play with his grandkids, specifically play catch with his grandson. Mr. Jones indicates his biggest barrier is after a couple of throws, he is in an overwhelming amount of pain. After submitting the MyPAIN questionnaire, Mr. Jones selects pain resources and reviews the resources on the UF PAMI website. The system automatically sends Dr. Smith a secure message that Mr. Jones MyPAIN questionnaire responses are ready for review. Just prior to her visit with Mr. Jones, Dr. Smith spends a few minutes reviewing the information assembled for her SDM encounter in PainManager which includes all of the information Mr. Jones submitted via MyPAIN provided in PainManager to prepare for that aspect of the upcoming visit as well. Dr. Smith notes that the Mr. Jones is in severe pain and has tried multiple treatments to alleviate the pain, but still is not able to meet his goal of playing with his grandkids. Also, as Dr. Smith is reviewing Pain Manager, he notices there has been no UDS found and received an infobutton stating there was no urine drug screen in the past year and recommends with his opioid prescription he should have an updated UDS. During the visit, Dr. Smith discusses potential treatment approaches that Mr. Jones has not tried before. This includes physical therapy or a pain management specialist, who may be more suited to treat complex pain. Also, another option is surgery as that may be the best option to fix the problem at the root.  such as massage, physical therapy and dry needling with Mr. Delta using the SHARE framework for SDM. Dr. Smith also informs him that they need to update the UDS as it has been over a year since the last one. Mr. Smith agrees to explore both treatment options as well as the update his UDS and this information is documented by Dr. Charlie
